who you're interested in?
I'm interested in the nature of the book business and its changes.
I think that two significant changes in the book business, there's more than two, but two or three are obvious.
The cooperative ownership of books is a very interesting phenomenon.
The speed of communications is a distinctly important development.
The internet and the availability of any number of books to millions and millions of people at once is a development that nobody can even begin to measure yet.
Cooperative space is an obvious new phenomenon in the book business.
International trade is a significant development in the Korean book business.
So the relationships of booksellers to foreign markets and the way those foreign markets work
are very interesting, who will take advantage of the imminent Chinese trade on the basis of how the Japanese trade has functioned.
Many of us, or some of us, have figured out ways to sell books to Japan on a modest basis, and does one use that as a structured model for beginning to consider how books are going to move to
China and other developing markets.
In my time, Canada and Australia and then Japan and then Germany all became more significant buyers.
And in terms of the United States, England became a significant customer in the sense that young English cooksellers started coming over to the United States instead of vice versa, although we all still go there.
The happy trend is that they have finally started to come here, realizing the books are cheaper in the United States.
And amongst many of us, there's a great deal of friendliness.
And I'm absolutely convinced the Young Book Trade in America, of which I once was a member, has had a great influence on the Young Book Trade in England.
The effect of all the organizations and organized structures of the book trade have had a great impact on
international trade in general and on ethics in particular in the United States to some degree.
That combined with information services with regard to problems like stolen books and so on has made knowledge a more available phenomenon for booksellers to the
to the best of their abilities.
It's hard to believe that the book trade is not terribly healthy.
The book trade is extremely healthy, I think, in this time.
I think there are a lot more young people entering the book business who are quick on their feet
Many of them are decently educated.
I think on the whole the book trade is smarter and wiser than it has been in the past.
This is accepting any individually specially gifted people who are their own kind at all time.
Who would you think of as a particularly interesting young person?
I think it's foolish to start singling out individual books.
Well, I think one of the most impressive booksellers in the world is William Reese.
Bill Reese works on several levels with a lot of books and considerable capital.
The capital is a very important consideration, I think.
Well, the wise use of the capital is always a significant matter.
I have tremendous respect for small individual dealers who use the book business to structure their lives in and who survive on the basis of the book business and who make a contribution and who don't need to be measured by quantity or dollars or impact on the rest of the world, but who nonetheless...
lead rich and rewarding defining lives and there are numerous booksellers of that sort as well I'm pleased to have found a profession through which one can make a living through which one can redefine oneself I had
originally intended to be and wanted to be and respected the notions of being a professor of English literature.
In fact, I had a third-rate mind.
It took me some time to figure that out, and I did do that on the basis of comparison with the minds of others with whom I went to school and with my abilities and my emotional needs.
In fact, I found that the book profession was admirably adaptable to an individual who was in need of developing something to do and a way to do it, commensurate with, in this case, my level of intelligence and my ability to work.
When booksellers do, unfortunately, although not absolutely, certainly in the manner in which I run the book business, they do need to be physically sound.
But in fact, the book business is also a home for many who are less physically able to deal with large quantities of books and could nonetheless deal just very happily with however many books they can deal with.
So in that regard, short of being blind at birth,
The book business is a profession that enables, that provides opportunities for one to earn some dignity and some self-respect as well as a living.
It allows for mobility.
It cuts across every class line.
I'm able to walk into the Library of Congress and into the Director's Office or the Lilly Library or
any institution without too much protocol because of the standing respect that I might have earned simply by dealing in material worthy of the concerns of any of those institutions.
I mean, the word serendipity is an obvious word, but I understand the definition of it.
But how did you come to choose that name for you?
I think a friend of mine suggested to me in my first year, and it became a happy choice because of its obvious connotations.
And in fact, after the fact, it mirrors the way in which I do run the book business in that I allow the books to choose me more than I...
seek to limit my view by choosing only the books that I think I know.
I'm certainly governed by circumstance and opportunity and the needs of others rather than my needs to prove to the world that I can have the finest copies of this particular set of books at the highest possible prices.
I've found, in fact, that once one gets involved in
any given subsection, one's opportunities in that area multiply, and one's knowledge grows, and one's range of effect might grow as well, so that from a single commitment to being interested in selling soroyan to a particular person, I've grown to be deeply involved with the soroyan estate,
Soroyan's papers, the Soroyan family, significant manuscripts and letters and books, and have come to regard myself as an eminent specialist in William Soroyan matters.
But it really only started because I had a Soroyan customer whose interests I wanted to nurse, and because I was interested in the bibliography of an author who was not well understood in terms of his physical production.
And since my customer's interest was mirrored by my own willingness, 20 years later I find that I'm still serving the same single customer and the larger world as well, with a vast range of opportunities and materials.
Were you involved at all in that transfer of the Sororian material from your time?
I've been involved in the Sororian matters of the Foundation, the Archive, from the beginning.
one way or another, sometimes happily, sometimes less happily.
Any comments on that, or would you rather leave that alone?
The resolution of placing the archive at Stanford under a legal structure which I can imagine, I think is not an unhappy solution to what had become a nightmare in terms of maintaining and continuing the integrity of a serious archive.
How this removal was achieved, I'm less happy with, but I'm hardly an insider with regard to the steps taken.
I have been involved in other archives that were on deposit at one institution and were subsequently removed to another, notably the Creeley Archive, which was on deposit at Washington University and subsequently bought by Stanford, even though Washington University had spent a great deal of its own money maintaining the archive and also adding to it by purchase.
University of California at Berkeley will not buy
and to supplement an archive which it has only on deposit.
The problem, of course, inherently lies in the nature of having archives on deposit.
Authors place archives on deposit at institutions, and institutions take them in at their own risk, given the fact that an author may decide to sell the archive to a different market at some later date.
That's certainly what happened at Wash U.
In the end, these processes are not unfamiliar and not surprising.
They mirror natural life and economic life outside the book trade.
Removals can be done with style or with lack of tact.
They can be ethical or unethical.
I have no comment on the ethics of other professionals.
when I'm in fact not a direct participant.
And that's, believe it or not, that's a terribly interesting matter to me.
These things happen.
Steph has got a home, and it was resolved.
At the beginning, you invited me to look around and to ask questions.
Tell me something about there is a scheme here.
Of course there's a scheme here.
Everything is in a high good order.
The books on the floor are only new arrivals since February.
1997, when I had a party in which there was not a book on the floor, and I served 520-course meals.
In here?
Yes.
With these bookshelves?
Well, the bookshelves are bookshelves.
There wasn't a book on the floor.
I've heard of that party.
Everybody loved it.
There were just new arrivals.
But tell me something about the scheme.
Is it more of a functional scheme, or does it have a... Everything is in perfect good order on shelves, and then it's alphabetical, according to subject.
I don't understand the question.
Okay.
I have a classic section.
I have American fiction since the war section.
I have a mystery section.
I have a science fiction section.
I have an Ernest Hemingway section.
I have a Henry James section.
I have a bibliography for sales section.
I have a Western Americana section.
I have a broadside section.
I have a Grace Livingston Hill section.
I have a Faith Baldwin section.
I have American Books and Rap Since 1850 section.
I have a Coleridge, Keith Shelley section.
I have a Drama section.
I have a Shakespeare section.
I have a Film section.
I have a Write 3 section.
I have a Write 2 section.
I have a Poetry section.
I have an Anthology section.
I have a Literature and Translation section, South American, Scandinavian, German, French.
I have an Australian literature section combined with New Zealand.
I have a North Point Press section.
I have a proofs section.
Yes.
It's probably not old enough that you have it.
That's funny.
I have all the sections you said in the question for a metaphysical section.
Well, we don't encourage.
I don't have a metaphysical section, in fact.
It's not an area in which I have any particular knowledge or deep interest.
And those are not customers in the past that I've proven that I could nurture.
So that's important then, isn't it?
I have sifting mechanisms, many.
I'm an experienced sifter by which I do...
I challenge anyone new who comes through the door to be interested in serendipity and the degree to which she is interested in serendipity and the potential here for me to serve them, to that degree I will respond.
Anyone is allowed to come in here and run around and browse at their heart's content so long as they leave us alone.
If they seek our assistance, we'll offer it to them.
Otherwise, we have work to do of our own.
I do regard myself as a bookstore for the community, but the community itself does not support me and doesn't provide a sufficiency of dollars by which I can keep my doors open.
That function is entirely my responsibility, and I have to administer the earning of funds to keep it all going at a tune of
an overhead of $40,000 a month or so, and it's been that way for a long time.
My only desire is to continue.
I don't have any goals other than to continue with dignity.
My sense of dignity may be different from someone else who requires that a store or her store be neat as a pin.
I am extremely mistrusting of bookstores that are neat as a pin.
But there are numerous booksellers who keep their stores neat as a pin that I like.
I may not like their bookstores as much as I like them, but I like to see bookstores that are in the habit of having new arrivals.
New arrivals are the secret of serendipity, at least for the young bookseller coming in who needs to make $100 that day.
Booksellers all need to make $100 a day net profit
or they're going to be in trouble, and then they, I suppose, need to grow from that.
Every bookseller?
Yes, indeed.
Book fairs are good in that respect?
Book fairs are a subject that requires a great amount of time and tolerance.
Book fairs are a phenomenon, and they should be treated with respect as a phenomenon and allowed their own life.
elected official of the ABAA and the former president, and a willing volunteer for many, many years on the Board of Governors.
I've been party to numerous discussions of book fairs and how to run them.
I have strong feelings about democracy and book fairs.
Book fairs have their own economic life.
They run their own course.
Very few have died.
Many have been born.
They, in some sense, have replaced catalogs in terms of the individual dealer's ability to make some money in a very short period of time.
Book fairs are a lot of work for those who decide that they want to exhibit a lot of books, like me, for instance, who takes 50 to 60 boxes to every book fair, compared with other booksellers who take a few choice books.
But book fairs are definitely a part of the antiquarian book scene.
are a very significant economic factor in the life of many booksellers.
Booksellers could do 40 book fairs a year easily if they want to.
And make a living off that.
And they obviously reflect a growing interest in the public.
I meant to say before that the biggest of all changes in the antiquarian book trade is that the public itself is a more willing participant and a more willing buyer.
That is to say, I think there are more private customers
private people buying books now, percentage-wise, than there had been, say, when I was a younger bookseller in the 60s.
That's a definite factor.
And another factor, I think, is that it isn't that books have appreciated, but that certain books have appreciated, or that big money has focused on the book trade to the degree that
Certain books now command very large sums of money relative to what they previously commanded, although this is not true of the book trade from top to bottom.
However, most booksellers at one time or another are part to a transaction in which expensive books change hands, not all by any means, but I think anyone who wants to be involved in such things can be involved in such things.
at his or her own risk.
And in this regard, newly entered into the book trade at all levels are items of truly significant, that is to say, high dollar value.
Without a doubt, this was not true when I was a young bookseller.
There were incunables that brought a lot of money in those days, but...
At this time, when modern first edition dealers can have $100,000 book fairs at Los Angeles, certain elements in the book trade have to be understood to have change.
And, of course, it is, I think, incumbent upon every bookseller who is interested in such matters to correctly understand what the change is and how to relate to it, either passively or actively.
There's no compulsion to change the way one does one's own business, but these changes have made it more... I don't want to say the word easy, more possible for booksellers to cover their overhead...
more readily through the dealing of books that are likely to command more dollars than their sources realized.
I think that's fair to say.
And you mentioned the book fair is here to stay, and of course the computer has changed the business.
You have people who do business strictly off computers.
There's no question that people do business strictly off computers, and they are limited only by the limits of their imagination and ability, and I'm certain that
many people will figure out ways in which to exploit the computer that are unimaginable.
Unimaginable.
Somebody's going to sell a thousand copies of a book that he has a thousand copies of in no time at all.
It just has to be a book that is susceptible to being sold a thousand copies over the internet to however many buyers tap into the internet.
I think the internet makes
accessible to millions and millions of people of books that previously were not accessible to them in those ways.
The book trade is still a very trusting business, and I think there's always a potential for fraud here and there, but I think books will flow because of the Internet just as readily or more readily than they have flowed already, and books flow quite readily as it is.
because there are very few inhibitions and challenges to trust in the book business.
And those that do challenge trust in the book business are soon found out and more or less effectively disposed of.
You touched on it, and you suggested that I do any questions for me, that it has, you know, there are 60, 400,000 books in this facility and several warehouses.
What are your plans for serendipity after Peter Holloway?
I don't have any plans, and I worry about it all the time, but I worry about it only on behalf of others, chiefly my wife, who is not interested in carrying on serendipity and who would not physically be able to deal with the 400,000 books.
On the other hand, just as I have efficiently, in concert with others, dealt with the
demise or the end of the firm of William P. Readon and the end of the firm of William Hoffer and the end of the firms of other booksellers.
So I'm confident the book trade in its aggregate wisdom can deal with the demise of serendipity.
Warren Howell was gone in three days and Zeitlin was gone in a week.
It might take a little longer for serendipity to be gone.
My hope would be that a trusted colleague might be able to step in and simply work the business as if it were his own.
The rent would be drastically reduced, paid to my estate.
The profits on all books would be shared by the new administrator with my family.
And the new person could develop his own business in whatever way he sees fit.
And I actually have such a person in mind who I think is willing.
But it's all very fragile.
If he's not willing, it will all dissolve in a few days.
Consigned books will be returned to the appropriate consignors, and the other books will be liquidated in the ways customary in the book business.
The building, which I own, will be sold for the benefit of my heirs, and it will be gone.
After it's gone, I think...
the city will be or the area will be the poorer for having lost a bookstore but that is inherently the nature of bookstores they're extremely fragile they're almost always one generational they reflect the personality of the founder I've made my business so big and so complex that no one
But me, in their right mind, would even want to take on the responsibility for it.
If it were sold, even at cost, it would be more money than anybody would likely have who would want to enter the book business.
Anybody with that sort of money would already be in the book business or would not waste their money by buying my books at cost.
You have children, however, who aren't interested.
I have two daughters who are nurses and who are not going to succeed me in the book business.
You mentioned how a bookstore reflects the personality of the person who established it and operates it.
How about the community?
Does being in Berkeley influence in any way?
Being in Berkeley definitely influences this business in the sense that the Bay Area is an extremely rich book area, albeit not rich in early books.
So that, and it's also economically an area in which there are people either by age or circumstance in need of selling books, just as it is an area in which there are sufficient incomes to allow the purchase of books, and overriding all that as an institutional organization that
that is to say the presence of enough institutions who consume books and who generate books, so that it's one of the most wonderful areas for books in the world, in my opinion.
And so naturally the nature and appearance of my store reflects the book community at large.
Books are produced in this area by numerous small presses and fine presses and fancy presses.
and by more modest publishers.
So many of the books that are now out of print, that grace my shelves, were printed in the Bay Area, or written by people in the Bay Area, or were consumed by people in the Bay Area, or written for people in the Bay Area.
Do you have an idea of how much, percentage-wise, how much of your business is from here?
I would have to believe that most of it is, you know... I write more than three...
more than 3,000 invoices a day and sell a few books over the counter.
I used to sell $34 a day over the counter after 19 years on Shattuck.
Now I suppose we sell somewhere between $100 and $200 a day over the counter.
I would say books that walk out, somebody whom we don't invoice because we don't need to keep a permanent record of the transaction.
It's a mail order book business that always has been and always will be, but I need the space to embrace my imagination and the product of my imagination, which is the acquisition of such books as I have here.
I think I have a lot here.
Anything I've missed that you think that you've actually... Well, it's all been very general, and I actually prefer specifics.
about the life of an antiquarian bookseller.
I hate generalizations about the book trade and about its nature and the nature of the people involved in it.
It's a very small group of people selling books, and the reasons why books are bought, made or bought, the economics of their movement from one place to another,
details of the relationships between people and organizations and people and booksellers are so complex and are constructed of such a long continuum that and yet the deal at the moment of purchase with only such a single specific book that the book trade is very resistant to generalizations properly so
Well, when you say specifics, specifically, what would we be more fruitfully exploring?
Well, that's, of course, the... Right, that's, of course, the... Dependent upon the degree of commitment and talent and specificity of the author of the book.
Of course, yeah.
And that's up to you.
I can only encourage you to get to the detailed...
moment that explains any given book or book transaction or sequence of transactions or lives rather than to impose notions from on high.
Well, it's not notions, but of course, you know, I'm a generalist.
I'm not a person who's a member of the trade.
I'm not a bookseller.
Well, you know, no defenses are required.
Go write a good book.
I need to be, you know, I follow up very well on suggestions, though, when people direct me.
Well, I think booksellers are, you know, it's very difficult to see what they have in common and how different they are.
It's very difficult to understand the range of their individual businesses.
It's very, very difficult to generalize about the whole of the antiquarian book business.
But the whole of the antiquarian business is, I think, you know...
Very dependent upon understanding the individuals involved, and each one is different.
Very different.
You mentioned being specific.
Actually, I am.
I'm working here about Peter Howard.
I'm being very specific.
I'm here to talk to you and to try and, in my own way, characterize, as best I can, your business and you.
No, I understand.
And you're of immense interest to me in both of those.
Well, I can provide a body of information, no question about it.
And I'm constantly attempting to understand myself and my own emotional needs, my own intellectual state and my own finances and my own past and my own future.
So I'm doing to myself what you're also trying to do to me, understand me.
By no means, I have been often accused of being incurious about things, including myself.
And to some degree that's true.
And I'm not certain that I'm going to become more reflective as I get older, but some of my friends are ill.
And physically, actually, one cannot do what one thinks one can do or what one has been accustomed to doing in the past.
So I think it's the physical...
slowing down that causes one to reflect at least to the degree that one decides, well, what next.
But if some library is to walk through the availability of some library who walks through the door, I'm very likely to be out the door in hot pursuit.
There's 200 boxes of romance philology awaiting me somewhere near the Washington Book Fair.
And I'm certainly interested in going and having a look.
There's a couple thousand playbills of
American drama from the beginning available theoretically to me at Yale.
So I'm going to New Haven on Monday.
So I think opportunity looming is still a big carrot for me.
And understanding the situation when one meets it and gets to it and making judgments is sort of the
skill required to ongoing.
I'm in the business of continuing to go on.
Do you mind if I shoot some pictures?
No, no, no.
A view as well?
Do you mind if I take a picture?
No, no.
Continue this, but...